+++
title = "1.1.2: PP (1 high 1 low) + AA"
date = 2020-04-23T19:19:21+08:00
lastmod = 2020-04-23T19:19:21+08:00
description = ""

slug = ""
variants = ["xiangqi"]
categories = ["XQSFCB"]
tags = ["translation"]
type = "series-post"

draft = true
+++

## Position 2 ##

In a real game with two pawns against the advisor pair, the outcome depends on the positioning of the two pawns. High + low pawns always win; two low pawns are difficult to win with {{< remark >}}(= they don't always win){{< /remark >}}; high + bottom pawns depend on whether the bottom pawn can help in the attack; low + bottom pawns always draw.

{{< remark >}}
Some terminology clarification:
- A "high" pawn is one which has not yet advanced to the enemy's cannon rank (enemy's palace roof rank).
- A "bottom" pawn is one which has advanced all the way to the opponent's bottom rank. Sometimes also called an "old" pawn.
- A "low" pawn is one which has advanced too far to be a high pawn, but not yet a bottom pawn.
{{< /remark >}}

As in the diagram, red's two pawns are in winning positions, and the play is as follows:

{{< fen-diag variant="xiangqi" caption="Initial position" fen="5a3/3ka4/2P6/5P3/9/9/9/9/9/4K4 w - - 0 1" >}}

**1. P7+1 K4-1**

If 1...K4+1, then 2. P4=5 and red wins quickly. {{< remark >}}(With P5+1 mating next.){{< /remark >}}

**2. K5+1 A5+4**

If 2...K4=5, then 3. P7=6 and black is stalemated.

**3. P4+1 A4-5 4. P4=5**

Bringing the pawn to the central file is the key to victory. It prepares to trade one pawn for both advisors to win.

**4...K4=5 5. P5+1 A6+5 6. P7=6**

Red wins.

{{< remark >}}It would be good for the reader to further analyse the other cases and verify the claims in the opening paragraph for themselves. Remember that the key to winning is to win both advisors for a single pawn, (stale)mating with the other after that.{{< /remark >}}