+++
title = "1.1.3: PP (1 high 1 low) + EE"
date = 2020-04-26T11:43:49+08:00
lastmod = 2020-04-26T11:43:49+08:00
description = ""

slug = ""
variants = ["xiangqi"]
categories = ["XQSFCB"]
tags = ["translation"]
type = "series-post"

draft = true
+++

## Position 3 ##

Two pawns versus the elephant pair also depends on the positions of pieces on both sides. High + low pawns always win; two low pawns can win only if they can control the elephants; high + bottom pawns always draw. From the diagram, red can win with high + low pawns against two elephants, but must pay attention to the correct timing and path for the high pawn to charge forward.

{{< fen-diag variant="xiangqi" caption="Initial position" fen="9/1P1k5/4b3b/3P5/9/9/9/9/9/4K4 w - - 0 1" >}}

**1. P8=7 K4=5**

If 1...K4-1, then 2. P6+1 E9+7 3. P6+1 K4=5 4. K5=4 E5+3 5. P7+1 and 6. P7=6, red wins.

{{< remark >}}Notice how against elephants, the red king can fully exert its influence on the rib files (4th and 6th files) without interference by black. Using its power is key to many endgames.{{< /remark >}}

{{< fen-diag variant="xiangqi" caption="Variation 1...K4-1, diagram after 4. K5=4" fen="4k4/2PP5/4b4/9/6b2/9/9/9/9/5K3 b - - 7 4" diag-type="variation" >}}

**2. P6=5 E5+3 3. K5=6**

Defending the low pawn's entry to the palace.

**3...E9+7 4. P7=6 K5=6 5. P5=4**

The high pawn manoeuvres to the other flank, setting up a pincer attack.

{{< remark >}}Another important point is that red only advances the high pawn when it is guaranteed to force black to the bottom rank. If black's king can get "above" both pawns, it is impossible for red to win here. Hence the use of the low pawn to guard the palace centre, and the high pawn supported by the king to force black's king down.{{< /remark >}}

{{< fen-diag variant="xiangqi" caption="After 5. P5=4" fen="9/3P1k3/9/5P3/2b3b2/9/9/9/9/3K5 b - - 9 5" >}}

**5...E3-5 6. K6=5 E7-9 7. K5=4**

The red king also moves to the other side, supporting the attack.

**7...E9+7 8. P4+1 K6-1 9. P4+1 K6=5 10. P4+1**

Red wins.