+++
title = "KNF v K"
date = 2020-04-21T22:01:50+08:00
lastmod = 2020-04-21T22:01:50+08:00
description = ""

slug = ""
variants = ["makruk"]
categories = []
tags = []
type = "post"

draft = true
+++

The makruk endgame KNF v K is surprisingly tough, and one of the fundamental endgames to learn.

I use here a mix of fairy chess conventions and translated Cambodian names for the pieces: khun (king, K for king), neang (queen, Q for queen), tuuk (boat, R for rook), sey (horse, N for knight), khon (S for silver general), trey (fish, F for ferz).

(The convention in endgames is that the superior side is white; in this case the side with horse and fish.)


## Result ##
The result is generally a draw, although in more than a few cases white can trap the black king in "the wrong corner" (from the defender's point of view) and win.


### Mating position ###
To begin understanding this endgame, first we need to see white's main winning idea. Consider the following position.

{{< fen-diag variant="makruk" fen="8/8/8/8/5N2/5M~2/5K2/7k w - - 0 1" >}}

From the diagram, play proceeds **1.Nh3 Kh2 2.Ng1 Kh1 3.Fg2+ Kh2 4.Nf3#**.

{{< fen-diag variant="makruk" caption="Mating position for KNF v K." fen="8/8/8/8/8/5N2/5KM~k/8 b - - 0 4" >}}

This sequence is important, so please make sure to remember it. There are several important remarks to make here:

- The mate can only be accomplished in the "wrong" corner, **one which the fish can reach**. (In western chess, this is analogous to the KNB v K mate.)
- White keeps black trapped in the corner with king and knight or fish, repositioning them one at a time for the mate.
- If in the first diagram it were black to move instead, the sequence above doesn't work directly (wrong side to move; a parity problem!)

The last point is interesting. Unlike the western chess KNB v K endgame, white cannot lose a move with the horse or the fish. Instead to regain the mating sequence, white must triangulate with the king to lose a move.


### Parity ###
Consider the first position, but with black to move instead. **1...Kh2** is forced; now what?

{{< fen-diag variant="makruk" caption="Position after 1...Kh2." fen="8/8/8/8/5N2/5M~2/5K1k/8 w - - 0 2" >}}

White needs to lose a move with the king, but currently he's busy guarding g3. First let's keep g2 guarded while giving him the f3 square to use; **2.Fg4 Kh1 3.Fh3 Kh2 4.Kf3!**.

{{< fen-diag variant="makruk" caption="Position after 4.Kf3! preparing to triangulate." fen="8/8/8/8/5N2/5K1M~/7k/8 b - - 0 4" >}}

Now black can choose a square to run to, but white will get the correct parity with the king eventually. Let's say **4...Kh1 5.Ke2!** (we see why the fish guards g2) **5...Kg1 6.Ke1!** zugzwang.

{{< fen-diag variant="makruk" caption="Position after 6.Ke1!, zugzwang. White will obtain the correct parity next." fen="8/8/8/8/5N2/7M~/8/4K1k1 b - - 0 6" >}}

Whichever square black's king goes to, white chooses the correct option for their own king to have the correct parity. If 6...Kh2 7.Kf2!, or else: **6...Kh1 7.Kf1! Kh2 8.Kf2 Kh1 9.Fg4 Kh2 10.Ff3 Kh1** and now we can do the winning sequence: **11.Nh3 Kh2 12.Ng1 Kh1 13.Fg2+ Kh2 14.Nf3#**.

Parity plays a large role in this endgame, and calculation is needed to determine which parity is desired at a critical moment -- see move 7.


### Proper defense ###
Despite the existence of the mating pattern, black can usually draw KNF v K. The correct drawing technique is to head to one of the "correct" corners. If forced away, black should immediately head to the other "correct" corner.