+++
title = "The sixth Meijin - Oohashi Souyo III"
date = 2021-04-04T14:55:11+08:00
lastmod = 2021-04-04T14:55:11+08:00
description = "Oohashi Souyo III, the oldest to assume the position of Meijin, took his place at the transition between generations."

slug = "the-sixth-meijin"
variants = ["shogi"]
categories = []
tags = []
type = "series-post"
series = ["shogi-history"]
+++

It was expected the the title of Meijin would be inherited by the younger generation, but at the passing of Meijin Itou Souin II, they were still too young and inexperienced to take over the reins of power. While they matured, the title of Meijin would go to a senior member of the three houses with a claim to the title, and so Ohasho Souyo III (大橋宗与, 1648-1728) found himself Meijin at the grand age of 75. He was the third head of the Oohashi branch family, but in terms of playing strength had had to play second fiddle to the representatives of the Oohashi main family and Itou family for decades.

His gifted tsumeshogi was the 100-problem collection [*Shogi Youshin Zushiki*](http://park6.wakwak.com/~k-oohasi/shougi/html/yousin/yousin00.html) (将棋養真図式) in 1717. This is a notorious collection, perhaps a rushed work or created for him by a malicious disciple, as over half the problems are cooked or rehashed from previous works like the [*Komakurabe*](http://park6.wakwak.com/~k-oohasi/shougi/html/komakura/komakura00.html), the [*Tekagami*](http://park6.wakwak.com/~k-oohasi/shougi/html/tekagami/tekagami00.html) and the [*Rikisou*](http://park6.wakwak.com/~k-oohasi/shougi/html/tikara/tikara00.html).

Nevertheless, he was a player of formidable stature, having participated in 38 Castle Shogi games -- the second-most of any player -- over a span of 42 years stretching back to 1682. His rivals in these games included 4th Meijin Oohashi Soukei V (2-5 accepting bishop handicap) and 5th Meijin Itou Souin II (10-2 accepting lance handicap, 0-9 in even games), the scorelines reflecting his skill, yet also showing that he was one step behind the very strongest of his contemporaries.

His final Castle Shogi game took place in 1724, against Oohashi Souju (born as Itou Souju, who soon after become the 8th head of the Oohashi main house, Oohashi Soukei VIII at the age of just 10). Souyo III lost giving a rook-lance handicap to the younger player, and in so doing set the record for the oldest player to ever contest a Castle game at 77 years old.

Oohashi Souyo III passed away soon after in 1728, aged 80. Spanning the decades, he had faced three other past or future Meijin across the board in Castle Shogi games in his career, and managed to have his brief moment in the spotlight.

The five years he had held the title was five years that the younger generation had to mature in age and in skill. After some controversy and an intervention by the shogunate temple and shrine magistrate, Itou Inju (now the 3rd head of the Itou house, Itou Soukan III) became the youngest ever Meijin at 23.